Transfer Learning Guide (#2394)
google/flax: docs/guides/transfer_learning.md

---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.13.8
kernelspec:
  display_name: 'Python 3.8.10 (''.venv'': venv)'
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Transfer Learning

+++

> In this guide we will walk through the process of doing Transfer Learning in Flax. There are various ways to do Transfer Learning and the best approach is task dependent, these range from just using the pretrained model as a feature extractor to fine-tuning the entire model.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
- Let's shorten the sentences.
- Recommended to talk to the user with "you" and use second person ("your") in general, instead of first person ("we", "our"). (Ref: https://developers.google.com/style/person)

```suggestion
This guide demonstrates how to perform transfer learning with Flax. There are various ways to do it, depending on your task. You can use a pretrained model as a feature extractor or fine-tune the entire model.
```

Author: Done!

> We will go through the main steps needed to perform Transfer Learning for a simple classification scenario which include:
> * Loading a pretrained model
> * Extracting a submodule from the pretrained model
> * Performing 'parameter surgery' to transfer the pretrained parameters into the new model structure.
> * Defining an optimization procedure.

Reviewer: Suggestions:
- Mention `optax` and `transformers`. These two external libraries are used throughout the guide. Add links to their docs.
- Add "Flax Module" before "submodule", as the latter term may be Flax-specific.
- Mention why "customizing" optimization is necessary (training different parts separately).
- Add other steps, like creating the model, training.
- Shorten the 3rd point ("'parameter surgery'") to avoid any metaphors just in case (ref: https://developers.google.com/style/tone).
- Use "you" when talking to users (second person) instead of first person ("we", "our"). (Ref: https://developers.google.com/style/person).
- Shorten some sentences.

```suggestion
You will learn how to do transfer learning for simple classification. The steps include how to:
* Load a pretrained model from HuggingFace [Transformers](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/index).
* Extract a Flax Module submodule from a pretrained model.
* Create the classifier model.
* Transfer the pretrained parameters to the new model structure.
* Set up optimization for training different parts of the model separately with [Optax](https://optax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
* Train the classifier.
```

LMKWYT.

---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.13.8
kernelspec:
  display_name: 'Python 3.8.10 (''.venv'': venv)'
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Transfer Learning

+++

This guide demonstrates how to perform transfer learning with Flax. There are various ways to do it, depending on your task. You can use a pretrained model as a feature extractor or fine-tune the entire model.

You will learn how to do transfer learning for simple classification. The steps include how to:
* Load a pretrained model from HuggingFace [Transformers](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/index).
* Extract a Flax Module submodule from a pretrained model.
* Create the classifier model.
* Transfer the pretrained parameters to the new model structure.
* Set up optimization for training different parts of the model separately with [Optax](https://optax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
* Train the classifier.

> **Note:** Depending on what you are doing some of the content from this guide will be suboptimal, specifically if you are only going to train a linear classifier on top of the pretrained model, it is better to just extract the embeddings of all the samples ahead of time and store them as a new dataset. This will result in much faster training and you can use better algorithms. However, this guide will show you how to do Transfer Learning in general.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note:** Depending on what you are doing some of the content from this guide will be suboptimal, specifically if you are only going to train a linear classifier on top of the pretrained model, it is better to just extract the feature embeddings once. This will result in much faster training and you can use specialized algorithms for linear regression or logistic classification. This guide shows how to do end-to-end Transfer Learning with all the model parameters.
```

You will learn how to do transfer learning for simple classification. The steps include how to:
* Load a pretrained model from HuggingFace [Transformers](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/index).
* Extract a Flax Module submodule from a pretrained model.
* Create the classifier model.
* Transfer the pretrained parameters to the new model structure.
* Set up optimization for training different parts of the model separately with [Optax](https://optax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
* Train the classifier.

**Note:** Depending on your task, some of the content from this guide may be suboptimal. Specifically, if you are only going to train a linear classifier on top of a pretrained model, it may be better to just extract the feature embeddings once. This can result in much faster training, and you can use specialized algorithms for linear regression or logistic classification. This guide shows how to do end-to-end transfer learning with all the model parameters.

## Setup

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [skip-execution]

! pip install transformers[flax]

> ! pip install -U jax jaxlib

Reviewer: And as discussed:

`!pip install -U flax jax jaxlib`, since `transformers` uses different versions of Flax and JAX.

Reviewer: Let's remove the installation steps and have those steps https://github.com/google/flax/pull/2429. Note that `pip install optax` wasn't here.

2. Create a mapping between partitions and their optimizer.
3. Create a pytree with the same shape as the parameters but its leaves containing the corresponding partition label.

### Freezing layers

To freeze layers with `multi_transform` create the `trainable` and `frozen` parameter partitions. For the `trainable` parameters use the `adam` optimizer, and for the `frozen` parameters use `optax.set_to_zero` which zeros-out the gradients. To map parameters to partitions you can use the `traverse_util.path_aware_map` function, by leveraging the `path` argument you can map the `backbone` parameters to `frozen` and the rest to `trainable`.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from flax import traverse_util
import optax

partition_optimizers = {'trainable': optax.adam(5e-3), 'frozen': optax.set_to_zero()}
param_partitions = freeze(traverse_util.path_aware_map(
  lambda path, v: 'frozen' if 'backbone' in path else 'trainable', variables['params']))
tx = optax.multi_transform(partition_optimizers, param_partitions)

# visualize a subset of the param_partitions structure
flat = list(traverse_util.flatten_dict(param_partitions).items())
freeze(traverse_util.unflatten_dict(dict(flat[:2] + flat[-2:])))

> ```

Reviewer: Following:

```python:
param_partitions = freeze(traverse_util.path_aware_map(
  lambda path, v: 'frozen' if 'backbone' in path else 'trainable', variables['params']))
```

You'd get:

```
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
AttributeError                            Traceback (most recent call last)
[<ipython-input-8-1c4930f778bf>](https://localhost:8080/#) in <module>
      3 
      4 partition_optimizers = {'trainable': optax.adam(5e-3), 'frozen': optax.set_to_zero()}
----> 5 param_partitions = freeze(traverse_util.path_aware_map(
      6   lambda path, v: 'frozen' if 'backbone' in path else 'trainable', variables['params']))
      7 tx = optax.multi_transform(partition_optimizers, param_partitions)

AttributeError: module 'flax.traverse_util' has no attribute 'path_aware_map'
```

Can you double check the code?

---

> jupytext:

Reviewer 2: I'm confused, is the notebook generated from this file? But shouldn't it be in the build dir then?

Reviewer: @cgarciae PTAL

Author: Re-posting here just in case:

Hey @jheek, using jupytext we are syncing the .ipynb and .md files, the .ipynb will be rendered but the .md are there to ease the review process.
